+++
title = "Photosynthesis and calcification at cellular, organismal and community levels in coral reefs: a review on interactions and control by carbonate chemistry"
date = 1999-01-01
authors = ["J-P Gattuso", "D. Allemand", "M. Frankignoulle"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "The cycles of carbon and carbonate in zooxanthellate scleractinian corals and coral reefs are reviewed considering several scales: molecular and cellular (pathways and transport mechanisms of inorganic carbon and calcium), organismic (interaction between photosynthesis and calcification, effect of light) and ecosystemic (community primary production and calcification, and air-sea CO2 fluxes).The coral host plays a major role in the carbon supply for for the photosynthesis of the algal symbionts, through a process similar to a carbon concentrating mechanism. The supply of carbon to calcification is almost unknown, but metabolic CO2 seems to be a major source of inorganic carbon. Calcium supply to calcification is thought to be mainly a diffusional process, the only active membrane transport would occur between the calicoblastic cells and the site of calcification. Photosynthesis and calcification are tightly coupled in zooxanthellate scleractinian corals and coral reef communities. Calcification is on average 3.8 times higher in the light than in darkness. The recent suggestion that calcification is dark-repressed rather than light-enhanced is not supported by the literature and requires further investigation. There is a very strong correlation between photosynthesis and calcification at the organism and community levels but their ratio is different from 1. The ratio of calcification vs gross photosynthesis is 0.71 in corals and 0.22 in reef communities.The effect of global climatic (pCO2 and temperature) changes on the rate of calcification is also reviewed. Available evidence demonstrates that the rate of calcification decreases as a function of increasing pCO2 and decreasing calcium carbonate saturation state in various calcifying photosynthetic organisms and communities. The potential decrease of CaCO3 deposition is estimated using the scenarios considered by the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The results suggest that the rate of calcification may have decreased by 10% between 1880 and 1990 and that it may decrease by 9-30% (mid estimate: 22%) from 1990 to 2100. Inadequate understanding of the mechanism of calcification and its interaction with photosynthesis severely limit the ability to provide an accurate prediction of future changes in the rate of calcification."
selected = false
publication = "*American Zoologist*"
+++

