+++
title = "Key impacts of climate engineering on biodiversity and ecosystems, with priorities for future research"
date = 2016-01-01
authors = ["Caitlin G. McCormack", "Wanda Born", "Peter J. Irvine", "Eric P. Achterberg", "Tatsuya Amano", "Jeff Ardron", "Jason J. Blackstock", "Pru N. Foster", "Jean-Pierre Gattuso", "Stephen J. Hawkins", "Erica Hendy", "W. Daniel Kissling", "Salvador E. Lluch-Cota", "Eugene J. Murphy", "Nick Ostle", "Nicholas Owens", "R. Ian Perry", "H-O Pörtner", "Robert J. Scholes", "Frank M. Schurr", "Oliver Schweiger", "Josef Settele", "Rebecca K. Smith", "Sarah Smith", "Jill Thompson", "Derek P. Tittensor", "Mark van Kleunen", "Chris Vivian", "Katrin Vohland", "Rachel Warren", "Andrew Watkinson", "Steve Widdicombe", "Phillip Williamson", "Emma Woods", "William J. Sutherland"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "Climate engineering (also known as geoengineering) refers to large-scale interventions designed to counteract global climate change. With slow progress towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions, climate engineering, including Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR) techniques such as ocean fertilisation or Solar Radiation Management (SRM) by stratospheric sulphate aerosol injections, is receiving increasing attention for its potential in mitigating climate change. Proposed interventions are intended to significantly alter the climate system (including its terrestrial, marine and atmospheric subsystems): yet the potential effects on biodiversity and ecosystems have received little attention. A process of ‘impact scanning’ was used to collate a list of potential ecological effects of climate engineering from the literature. We then used a modified Delphi technique with a group of experienced researchers to rank the effects of different climate engineering techniques on biodiversity and ecosystems, based upon an assessment of the relative importance of their consequences and the amount of existing scientific understanding about them. These assessments were used to identify priority topics for further research, and to formulate specific key research questions for those environmental changes considered to be of highest priority. This first detailed evaluation is a critical starting point for further ecological research to increase understanding of the biodiversity and ecosystem consequences of climate engineering techniques. It also provides a valuable indication for policy makers of the key ecological issues that must be considered in scoping climate engineering options and decision making."
selected = false
publication = "*Journal of Integrative Environmental Sciences*"
+++

