+++
title = "Effect of environmental conditions and skeletal ultrastructure on the Li isotopic composition of scleractinian corals"
date = 2009-01-01
authors = ["C Rollion-Bard", "N Vigier", "A Meibom", "D Blamart", "S Reynaud", "R Rodolfo-Metalpa", "S Martin", "J-P Gattuso"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "The lithium isotopic compositions (7Li/6Li) of shallow-water and deep-sea corals (Porites lutea, Cladocora caespitosa, Lophelia pertusa and Desmophyllum cristagalli) was measured using a Caméca ims 1270 ion microprobe. The two Cladocora caespitosa samples were grown under controlled conditions at CO2 partial pressures (pCO2) of 416 ± 29 µatm and 729 ± 30 µatm. In situ analyses show that all samples are isotopically homogeneous (within error bars)display significantly lower 7Li values relative to seawater, indicating a significant isotope fractionation during aragonite formation. The in situ analyses show that all studied corals are isotopically homogeneous (within error bars). In contrast to all other elements analysed so far, there is no relationship between the Li isotopic compositions and the skeletal ultrastructure. This implies that the biomineralization mechanisms, which are supposed to be different in the early mineralization zones and the fibers, do not influence the Li isotopic composition in corals. In particular, the model of Rayleigh fractionation in a semi-closed calcifying fluid is not compatible with the homogeneity of the Li isotope compositions at the micrometer scale. We also show that changes in pCO2 (and pH) do not significantly affect the Li isotope signature, within error bars. Nevertheless, a small but significant and systematic difference between deep-sea azooxanthellate and shallow-water zooxanthellate species is highlighted. The lack of dependence on pH and pCO2 and on skeletal ultrastructure indicates Li isotopic signature of corals could be used as a proxy for reconstructing the paleo-7Li of seawater and, potentially, for deconvolving past continental weathering rates."
selected = false
publication = "*Earth and Planetary Science Letters*"
+++

