+++
title = "Constraining calcium isotope fractionation (δ44/40Ca) in modern and fossil scleractinian coral skeleton"
date = 2013-01-01
authors = ["C Pretet", "E Samankassou", "T Felis", "S Reynaud", "F Böhm", "A Eisenhauer", "C Ferrier-Pagès", "J-P Gattuso", "G Camoin"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "The present study investigates the influence of environmental (temperature, salinity) and biological (growth rate, inter-generic variations) parameters on calcium isotope fractionation (δ44/40Ca) in scleractinian coral skeleton to better constrain this record. Previous studies focused on the δ44/40Ca record in different marine organisms to reconstruct seawater composition or temperature, but only few studies looked at corals. This study presents measurements performed on modern corals from natural environments (from the Maldives for modern and from Tahiti for fossil corals) as well as from laboratory cultures (Centre scientifique de Monaco). Measurements on Porites sp., Acropora sp., Montipora verrucosa and Stylophora pistillata allow constraining inter-generic variability.Our results show that the fractionation of δ44/40Ca ranges from 0.62 to 0.99‰, independently of the genus or the environmental conditions. No significant relationship between the rate of calcification and δ44/40Ca was found. The weak temperature dependence reported in earlier studies is possibly not the only parameter that is responsible for the fractionation. Indeed, sub-seasonal temperature variations reconstructed by δ18O and Sr/Ca ratio using a multi-proxy approach, are not mirrored in the coral’s δ44/40Ca variations. The inter- and intra-generic variability among the studied samples is weak except for S. pistillata, which shows calcium isotopic values increasing with salinity. The variability between samples cultured at a salinity of 40 is higher than those cultured at a salinity of 36 for this species. The present study reveals a strong biological control of the skeletal isotopic composition by the polyp and a weak influence of environmental factors, specifically temperature and salinity (except for S. pistillata), on the calcium isotopic fractionation. Vital effects have to be investigated in situ to better constrain their influence on the calcium isotopic signal. If vital effects could be extracted from the isotopic signal, the calcium isotopic composition of coral skeletons could provide reliable information on the calcium composition and budget in ocean."
selected = false
publication = "*Chemical Geology*"
+++

