+++
title = "Contribution of soft-bottoms to the community metabolism (carbon production and calcification) of a barrier reef flat (Moorea, French Polynesia)"
date = 1998-01-01
authors = ["G. Boucher", "J. Clavier", "C. Hily", "J-P Gattuso"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "The relative contribution of soft bottoms to the community metabolism (primary production, respiration and net calcification) of a barrier reef flat has been investigated at Moorea (French Polynesia). Community metabolism of the sedimentary area was estimated using in situ incubations in perspex chambers, and compared with estimates of community metabolism of the whole reef flat obtained using a Lagrangian technique (Gattuso et al., 1996. Carbon flux in coral reefs. 1. Lagrangian measurement of community metabolism and resulting air-sea CO2 disequilibrium. Mar. Ecol. Frog. Ser. 145, 109-121). Net organic carbon production (E), respiration (R) and net calcification (G) of sediments were measured by seven incubations performed in triplicate at different irradiance. Respiration and environmental parameters were also measured at four randomly selected additional stations. A model of Photosynthesis-irradiance allowed to calculate oxygen (O-2), organic carbon (CO2) and calcium carbonate (CaCO3) evolution from surface irradiance during a diel cycle. As chlorophyll a content of the sediment was not significantly different between stations, primary production of the sediment was considered as homogeneous for the whole lagoon. Thus, carbon production at the test station can be modelled from surface light irradiance. The modelled respiration was two times higher at the test station than the mean respiration of the barrier reef, and thus underestimated sediment contribution to excess production. Sediments cover 40-60% of the surface and accounted for 2.8-4.1% of organic carbon excess production estimated with the modelled R and 21-32% when mean R value was considered. The sedimentary CaCO3 budget was a very minor component of the whole reef budget. (C) 1998 Elsevier Science B.V."
selected = false
publication = "*Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology*"
+++

